---
author: Benoît "badetitou" Verhaeghe
layout: post
title: "Costers collection"
subtitle: "Or how to create a minimal model in Moose 8"
header-img: "misc/img-2019-11-19-Coasters/background.jpg"
date:   2019-11-19 12:00:00 +200
categories: pharo moose
---

## Introduction

Since years, I'm a collection coasters collector.
I'm not a huge collector but I want to inventory them in one place.
For sure, I can create a PostgreSQL database.
But, at the same time, it appears that I can also design my collection using Moose.

*So, you're going to use a complete system analysis software to manage your coasters collection?*

Exactly! And why? Because I think it's simpler.

## Design

As for every software system, the first step is to design the model.
In my case, I want to represent a collection of coasters.
Let's say a coaster is an entity.
It can belongs to a brewery or not (for example event coasters).
A coaster also has a form.
It can be round, squared, oval, or others.
A Coaster can also be specific to a country.
Because it is a collection, I can register coaster I own and other I do not.
Finally, each coaster can have an associated image.

From this description of the problem, I designed my UML schema:

{% include image.html
            img="/misc/img-2019-11-19-Coasters/coastersUML.png"
            caption="Coaster collection UML"
%}

The most complicated part is done.
We just need to implement the meta-model in Moose now :smile:.

## Implementation

First of all, we'll need a Moose 8 image.
You can find everything you need to install Moose in the [moose-wiki](https://moosetechnology.github.io/moose-wiki/).

### Configuration

**Ok!** Let's create a generator that will generate for us the meta-model.
We only need to describe the meta-model in the generator.
We will name this generator CoasterCollectorMetamodelGenerator.

```st
FamixMetamodelGenerator subclass: #CoasterCollectorMetamodelGenerator
	slots: {  }
	classVariables: {  }
	package: 'CoasterCollector-Model-Generator'
```

The generator needs to define two methods for the configuration:

- `#packageName` defines where the meta-model will be generated
- `#prefix` defines the prefix of each class when they are generated.

We used for `#packageName`:

```st
packageName
	^ #'CoasterCollector-Model'
```

We used for `#prefix`:

```st
prefix
	^ #'CC'
```

Now, we have to define the entities, their properties, and their relations.

### Define entities

A meta-model is composed of entities.
In our case, it corresponds to the entities identified in the UML.
We use the method `#defineClasses` to define the entities of our meta-model.

```st
CoasterCollectorMetamodelGenerator>>#defineClasses
    super defineClasses.
    coaster := builder newClassNamed: #Coaster.

    country := builder newClassNamed: #Country.

    shape := builder newClassNamed: #Shape.
    round := builder newClassNamed: #Round.
    square := builder newClassNamed: #Square.
    oval := builder newClassNamed: #Oval.

    creator := builder newClassNamed: #Creator.
    brewery := builder newClassNamed: #Brewery.
```

We also need to define the hierarchy of those entities:

```st
CoasterCollectorMetamodelGenerator>>#defineHierarchy
    super defineHierarchy.
    brewery --|> creator.
    oval --|> shape.
    square --|> shape.
    round --|> shape.
```

### Define properties

As we have defined the classes, we defined the properties of the entities using the `#defineProperties` method.

```st
defineProperties
    super defineProperties.
    creator property: #name type: #String.
    country property: #name type: #String.
    coaster property: #image type: #String.
    coaster property: #owned type: #Boolean
```

In this example, we did not use Trait already created in Moose.
However, it is possible to use the Trait `TNamed` to define that countries and creators have a name instead of using properties.

### Define relations

Finally, we defined the relations between our entities:

```st
defineRelations
    super defineRelations.
    (coaster property: #shape) *- (shape property: #coasters).
    (coaster property: #country) *- (country property: #coasters).
    (coaster property: #creator) *- (creator property: #coasters).
```

### Generate

Once everything is defined, we only need to use the generator to build our meta-model.

```st
CoasterCollectorMetamodelGenerator generate
```

The generation creates a new package with our entities.
It also generates a class named Model used to create an instance of our meta-model.

## Create my collection

I have created my meta-model.
Now I need to fill my collection.
First of all I will create a collection of coasters.
To do so, I instantiate a model with: `CCModel new`.
And now I can add the entities of my real collection in my model and I can explore it in Moose.

For example, to add a new brewery I execute: `model add: (CCBrewery new name: 'Badetitou'; yourself)`.

The code is available [on github](https://github.com/badetitou/CoastersCollector).